---
layout: post
title: The Myth of the Evil Terrorist
tags: [politics,terrorism,philosophy]
---

In recent years Islamic terrorist attacks in Europe have somewhat taken over
the media discourse. Certainly more people are killed in road accidents than in
terrorist attacks; in the UK between 2000 and 2013, there were [89
fatalities](https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/) due to terrorist attacks (of all
types - not just Islamic) but there were [38,316
fatalities](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/annual-road-fatalities)
in Great Britain due to road accidents in the same period.

Such a comparison of numbers is on the surface valid yet is often deemed
erroneously reductionist, simplistic, cynical, and clich√©d. Road accidents are
usually just that - accidents, with no malice or specific desire to kill. If
someone were to be killed in a road accident, there is a sense in that this
person was just unlucky; another number in the statistic. Terrorists, on the
other hand, set out to kill. If someone were to be killed by a terrorist then
there is a motive behind the death; the terrorist motive. In the road accident
the morals of the participants play no role, but in the terrorist attack the
clash of morals of the terrorist and the victims is usually the premise of the
attack.

The media of the victims therefore portray the terrorist as evil; the media of
the terrorists likewise portray the victims as evil. Both of these are nice
stories that resonate with our sense of narrative. It is given (to the intended
audience of this post) that anti-extremist campainers are highly moral. Let me
be controversial for a moment: Islamic terrorists are some of the most moral
people in our society.

Moderately religious and atheist people tend to forget the power of belief. To
really _believe_ something is to _hold true in one's mind_. If you believe that
you were sent on a mission by God to establish the Caliphate, then it is
perhaps the most moral thing to do is precisely what the terrorists do. It
would be immoral to sit around and do nothing and not help establish such a
Caliphate. But you don't believe in the establishment of the Caliphate, so you
think that the terrorists are immoral. Islamic terrorists have a fundamentally
different conception of reality, and it is this clash of _conceptions_ that
leads to violence. Similarly a conspiracy theorist believes supposedly "crazy"
things about the world, while you (perhaps) do not. The difference between you
and a consipracy theorist is the same nature of that between you and an islamic
terrorist, and the only distinction between the two is one of scale. Yet you do
not regard the conspiracy theorist as evil.

When was the last time you went on a political march? Were you shouting outside
Parliament yesterday to defend the rights of EU citizens post-Brexit? If you
were, then your belief that it is moral that the rights of EU citizens be
upheld post-brexit led you to that political march, and you were behaving
morally. In the same way, the terrorist has beliefs about morality that lead
them to behave in a certain way. The poltical activist and the terrorist can be
just as moral as each other; it is their beliefs that lead to problems.

Beliefs influence behaviour, and so it is not the holder of the beliefs that
are immoral. In order to stop Islamic terrorist attacks, we must stop the
demonisation of terrorists and we must view them as victims of a set of
beliefs. Having been deradicalised, former Islamic terrorists can play a highly
postive role in our society due to their highly moral nature. But what makes
our set of beliefs any more moral than those of Islamic terrorists? Why instead
shouldn't they be "de-Westernising" us into extremist Islam?

Which beliefs lead to the action that leads to the least human suffering? This
is a difficult question to answer but one we can entertain. It may seem obvious
that the beliefs of an Islamic terrorist lead to more human suffering that
those of a moderate Muslim or a Catholic. It is in this way that we "prefer"
the belief systems of a moderate Muslim or Catholic. Furthermore, it may also
be the case that secular beliefs lead to less human suffering than moderate
Islamic or Catholic beliefs. In this way we can rank belief systems, and our
moral framework need only one axiom: minimise the amount of human suffering. A
one-axiom moral framework is necessarily the most parsimonious of all moral
frameworks, and it is certainly more parsimonious than any religious one.
